docs: Ubuntu package publishing docs (#353)
canonical/launchpad-manual: docs/developer/explanation/ubuntu-package-publishing.rst

Ubuntu package publishing
=========================

The Debian package lifecycle describes the process from a `source package upload <https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/how-ubuntu-is-made/concepts/package-format/#source-packages>`_
to the `Ubuntu package archive <https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/how-ubuntu-is-made/concepts/package-archive/>`_.
This involves multiple steps in which the original source package is verified,
built into a `binary package <https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/how-ubuntu-is-made/concepts/package-format/#binary-packages>`_
and finally published into the package archive.

Please note that this document is not describing the policies and
review processes involved in accepting package changes
or the migrations between suites, but rather the technical steps

> involved in the publishing process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that this document only describes the technical steps 
involved in the publishing process, It does not describe the policies and
review processes involved in accepting package changes
or the migrations between suites.
```

#####################
Source package upload
#####################

The first step of the publishing process is to upload a source package
with a signed source ``.changes`` file. The signed document references

> and includes checksums of the files to upload and the source package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step of the publishing process is to upload a source package
with a signed source ``.changes`` file. The signed document references
and includes checksums of the source package and of the files to upload.
```
The original statement is a bit confusing. It could be interpreted to mean the signed document also includes the actual source package. Feel free to edit my suggestion to get the correct meaning across.

FTP or SFTP to push the files to Launchpad, specifically ``upload.ubuntu.com``.

The Ubuntu upload processor (``process-upload.py``) runs periodically.
When it finds a newly uploaded source package,
it performs various checks, including:

- ensuring the signature on the changes file is valid and that the key used
  is associated with a user who has permission to upload
  to the target distribution/series/archive
- ensuring all checksums match
- confirming that it really is a source upload

..
    TODO: Create and link to librarian explainer

Once all checks pass, the script uploads the files to the librarian and
creates a queue entry (``PackageUpload``) in the database.
If any checks fail the package upload is marked as ``REJECTED``.

If the upload is automatically accepted (e.g. for the devel series when it is not frozen),
the system immediately creates a ``PENDING`` source package publishing history
entry and creates all necessary binary package build requests for the architectures
supported by the Ubuntu series that the uploaded source package targets.
Otherwise, these are created later when the package is accepted from the queue.

########
Building
########

> he ``buildd-manager`` service manages the builder VMs of all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``buildd-manager`` service manages the builder VMs of all
```

supported architectures in the Launchpad build farm by communicating with the
``launchpad-buildd`` service that runs on them.

For a binary package build, a ``launchpad-buildd`` instance is given a list
of artifacts to download from the librarian, the source package,

> and the chroot to build it in. The VM then downloads the chroot, unpacks it,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the chroot to build the source package in. The VM then downloads the chroot, unpacks it,
```

and uses ``sbuild`` to build the package.

The ``buildd-manager`` queries all ``launchpad-buildd`` instances
regularly. Once a VM reports that a build is complete, it copies the

> changes file and built artifacts (mostly debs, ddebs, and the buildinfo file)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
changes file and build artifacts (mostly debs, ddebs, and the buildinfo file)
```
built artifacts - artifacts that were built
build artifacts - artifacts from the build process

off the builder and uploads them as a binary package.

#####################
Binary package upload
#####################

The binary packages from the Launchpad builders
are processed by ``process-upload.py``. This script again performs

> various checks like ensuring that the architecture of the built debs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
various checks such as ensuring the architecture of the built debs
```
nitpick but 'like' sounds a bit casual

matches what was expected and verifying that the checksums match.
Once all checks pass, the artifacts are copied
to the librarian and a queue entry is created.

> If any checks fail the package upload is marked as ``REJECTED``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Once all checks pass, the artifacts are copied
to the librarian and a queue entry is created.
If any checks fail, the package upload is marked as ``REJECTED``.
```
Spacing to emphasize that this comes after the other.

################
Queue processing
################

Binary queue items usually go straight into the ``ACCEPTED`` state, 
but a build that introduces new binary packages goes into ``NEW``.
This occurs either because the binary package was newly accepted into

> the archive or due to the package being a kernel package, which are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the archive or due to the package being a kernel package. Kernel packages are
```

always published as new binary packages with the version as a part
of the binary package name.

The ``process-accepted`` script iterates through all ``ACCEPTED``
binary queue items and creates new ``PENDING`` binary package
publishing history entries.

###########
Publication
###########

The archive publisher reads the set of current publication records
for a component (i.e. main/universe/…) of a suite (which is a combination

> of a series and a pocket like ``noble-proposed`` or ``questing-release``),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The archive publisher reads the set of current publication records
for a component, i.e., ``main/universe/…``, of a suite (which is a combination
of a series and a pocket like ``noble-proposed`` or ``questing-release``),
```
